add: segmentation guide. (#5188)
huggingface/datasets: docs/source/semantic_segmentation.mdx

> # Image classification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Semantic segmentation
```

Semantic segmentation datasets are used to train a model to classify every pixel in an image. There are

> a wide variety of applications enabled by these datasets such as background removal from images and stylizing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a wide variety of applications enabled by these datasets such as background removal from images, stylizing
```

> them or scene understanding for autonomous driving. This guide will show you how to apply transformations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
images, or scene understanding for autonomous driving. This guide will show you how to apply transformations
```

> to an image classification dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to an image segmentation dataset.
```

Before you start, make sure you have up-to-date versions of `albumentations` and `cv2` installed:

```bash
pip install -U albumentations opencv-python
```

This guide uses the [Scene Parsing](https://huggingface.co/datasets/scene_parse_150) dataset for segmenting
and parsing an image into different image regions associated with semantic categories, such as sky, road, person, and bed.

Load the dataset and take a look at an example:

```py
>>> from datasets import load_dataset

>>> dataset = load_dataset("scene_parse_150")
>>> index = 10
>>> dataset["train"][index]
{'image': <PIL.JpegImagePlugin.JpegImageFile image mode=RGB size=683x512 at 0x7FB37B0EC810>,
 'annotation': <PIL.PngImagePlugin.PngImageFile image mode=L size=683x512 at 0x7FB37B0EC9D0>,
 'scene_category': 927}
```

The dataset has three fields:

* `image`: a PIL image object.
* `annotation`: segmentation mask of the image.
* `scene_category`: the label or scene category of the image (like “kitchen” or “office”).

> Next, check out an image with `dataset["train"][index]["image"]`:

Reviewer: I think it'd be nice to put this code in a code block so users can easily copy it (same with the code below)

<div class="flex justify-center">
    <img src="https://i.ibb.co/NKYHp5v/download.png">
</div>

Similarly, you can check out the respective segmentation mask (`dataset["train"][index]["annotation"]`):  

<div class="flex justify-center">
    <img src="https://i.imgur.com/qhTK2at.png">
</div>

We can also overlay the segmentation mask on top of the original image as is commonly done
when visualizing segmentation datasets. For that, we first need to define

> a [color palette](https://github.com/tensorflow/models/blob/3f1ca33afe3c1631b733ea7e40c294273b9e406d/research/deeplab/utils/get_dataset_colormap.py#L51):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a [color palette](https://github.com/tensorflow/models/blob/master/research/deeplab/utils/get_dataset_colormap.py):
```

Reviewer 2: is it not better to have permalink here in case codebase changes?

Reviewer 3: Good point!

> We can also overlay the segmentation mask on top of the original image as is commonly done
> when visualizing segmentation datasets. For that, we first need to define
> a [color palette](https://github.com/tensorflow/models/blob/3f1ca33afe3c1631b733ea7e40c294273b9e406d/research/deeplab/utils/get_dataset_colormap.py#L51):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also add a [color palette](https://github.com/tensorflow/models/blob/3f1ca33afe3c1631b733ea7e40c294273b9e406d/research/deeplab/utils/get_dataset_colormap.py#L51) on the segmentation mask and overlay it on top of the original image to visualize the dataset:
```

I think its clearer/stronger if we lead with exactly what we're going to do. Then we can remove the sentence right after it :)

After defining the color palette, you should be ready to visualize some overlays. 

```py
>>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

>>> def visualize_seg_mask(image: np.ndarray, mask: np.ndarray):
...    color_seg = np.zeros((mask.shape[0], mask.shape[1], 3), dtype=np.uint8)

> ...    palette = np.array(create_ade20k_label_colormap())

Reviewer 2: Maybe actually define this function instead of linking to it above and never defining it?

Reviewer 2: idk fine either way I suppose. It's quite long

Author: Yeah, because of the length, I decided not to include it.

...    for label, color in enumerate(palette):
...        color_seg[mask == label, :] = color
...    color_seg = color_seg[..., ::-1]  # convert to BGR

...    img = np.array(image) * 0.5 + color_seg * 0.5  # plot the image with the segmentation map
...    img = img.astype(np.uint8)

...    plt.figure(figsize=(15, 10))
...    plt.imshow(img)
...    plt.axis("off")
...    plt.show()

>>> visualize_seg_mask(
...     np.array(dataset["train"][index]["image"]),
...     np.array(dataset["train"][index]["annotation"])
... )
```

<div class="flex justify-center">
    <img src="https://i.imgur.com/QoQ9R0f.png">
</div>

> Now apply some augmentations with `albumentations`. You’ll first resize the image and adjust its brightness.

Reviewer 3: Some people might not know what `albumentations` is, so maybe add a few words about what it is

```py
>>> import albumentations as A

>>> transform = A.Compose(
...     [
...         A.Resize(256, 256),
...         A.RandomBrightnessContrast(brightness_limit=0.3, contrast_limit=0.3, p=0.5),
...     ]
... )
```

Create a function to apply the transformation to the images:

```py
>>> def transforms(examples):
...     transformed_images, transformed_masks = [], []
...
...     for image, seg_mask in zip(examples["image"], examples["annotation"]):
...         image, seg_mask = np.array(image), np.array(seg_mask)
...         transformed = transform(image=image, mask=seg_mask)
...         transformed_images.append(transformed["image"])
...         transformed_masks.append(transformed["mask"])
...
...     examples["pixel_values"] = transformed_images
...     examples["label"] = transformed_masks
...     return examples
```

Use the [`~Dataset.set_transform`] function to apply the transformation on-the-fly to batches of the dataset to consume less disk space:

```py
>>> dataset.set_transform(transforms)
```

> You can verify the transformation worked by indexing into the `pixel_values` and `label` of the `index`th example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can verify the transformation worked by indexing into the `pixel_values` and `label` of an example:
```

```py
>>> image = np.array(dataset["train"][index]["pixel_values"])
>>> mask = np.array(dataset["train"][index]["label"])

>>> visualize_seg_mask(image, mask)
```

<div class="flex justify-center">
    <img src="https://i.imgur.com/xCU11KU.png">
</div>

> In this guide, you have used `albumentations` for augmenting the dataset. It's also possible to use `torchvision` for that purpose. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, you have used `albumentations` for augmenting the dataset. It's also possible to use `torchvision` to apply some similar transforms.
```

```py 
>>> from torchvision.transforms import Resize, ColorJitter, Compose

>>> transformation_chain = Compose([
...     Resize((256, 256)),
...     ColorJitter(brightness=0.25, contrast=0.25, saturation=0.25, hue=0.1)
... ])
>>> resize = Resize((256, 256))

>>> def train_transforms(example_batch):
...     example_batch["pixel_values"] = [transformation_chain(x) for x in example_batch["image"]]
...     example_batch["label"] = [resize(x) for x in example_batch["annotation"]]
...     return example_batch

>>> dataset.set_transform(train_transforms)

>>> image = np.array(dataset["train"][index]["pixel_values"])
>>> mask = np.array(dataset["train"][index]["label"])

>>> visualize_seg_mask(image, mask)
```

<div class="flex justify-center">
    <img src="https://i.imgur.com/9Jwn0mN.png">
</div>

> You can follow [this resource](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/tasks/semantic_segmentation)

Reviewer: I think the transition here can be a little smoother. Maybe something like:

Now that you know how to process a dataset for semantic segmentation, learn [how to train a semantic segmentation model](link to doc) and use it for inference.

Author: I agree it's a better transition. Maybe we could follow something similar for the rest of the related guides in `datasets`?

Reviewer: For sure, that sounds good to me :)

> to learn how to train a semantic segmentation using the techniques shown in this guide. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to learn how to train a semantic segmentation model using the techniques shown in this guide. 
```

# Semantic segmentation

Semantic segmentation datasets are used to train a model to classify every pixel in an image. There are
a wide variety of applications enabled by these datasets such as background removal from images, stylizing
images, or scene understanding for autonomous driving. This guide will show you how to apply transformations
to an image segmentation dataset.

Before you start, make sure you have up-to-date versions of `albumentations` and `cv2` installed:

```bash
pip install -U albumentations opencv-python
```

[Albumentations](https://albumentations.ai/) is a Python library for performing data augmentation
for computer vision. It supports various computer vision tasks such as image classification, object
detection, segmentation, and keypoint estimation.

This guide uses the [Scene Parsing](https://huggingface.co/datasets/scene_parse_150) dataset for segmenting
and parsing an image into different image regions associated with semantic categories, such as sky, road, person, and bed.

Load the dataset and take a look at an example:

```py
>>> from datasets import load_dataset

> >>> dataset = load_dataset("scene_parse_150")

Author: Sure, but note that the dataset only has `train` split. But I guess it's fine load that split to make the code bit less verbose.

...     ]
... )
```

Create a function to apply the transformation to the images:

```py
>>> def transforms(examples):
...     transformed_images, transformed_masks = [], []
...
...     for image, seg_mask in zip(examples["image"], examples["annotation"]):
...         image, seg_mask = np.array(image), np.array(seg_mask)
...         transformed = transform(image=image, mask=seg_mask)
...         transformed_images.append(transformed["image"])
...         transformed_masks.append(transformed["mask"])
...
...     examples["pixel_values"] = transformed_images
...     examples["label"] = transformed_masks
...     return examples
```

Use the [`~Dataset.set_transform`] function to apply the transformation on-the-fly to batches of the dataset to consume less disk space:

```py
>>> dataset.set_transform(transforms)
```

You can verify the transformation worked by indexing into the `pixel_values` and `label` of an example:

```py
>>> image = np.array(dataset["train"][index]["pixel_values"])
>>> mask = np.array(dataset["train"][index]["label"])

>>> visualize_seg_mask(image, mask)
```

<div class="flex justify-center">

>     <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/datasets/albumentations_seg.png">

Author: Nevermind, I figured it out. 

Here's the PR: https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/discussions/8. 

Once that is merged, I will update the links here and merge this PR. Sounds good? @lhoestq @osanseviero?

>     <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/datasets/albumentations_seg.png">

Reviewer 4: Nice ! thanks :)
